---
layout: post
title: "TMM - An Overview"
---

[_The Mythical Man Month_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mythical_Man-Month) is the _tour de force_ of Fred Brooks, a software engineer and architect who is best known for managing the development of [OS/360](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OS/360_and_successors). The book details the concept of a __man-month__, the hypothetical unit of measure for the amount of work completed by one person in one month. The enduring idea is summarised as such:

> The _man-month_ is a myth; it is impossible to measure useful work in man-months.

While the book is dated, it is considered one of the most influential books ever written. A few points remain highly relevant in the programming industry today.

First, good programs need time to formalize: projects more often than not go awry for lack of allocated time.

Next, all programmers are optimists: Few difficulties are expected during implementation, because the medium in which we work in is inherently tractable.

Faulty ideas cause bugs more than faulty implementation.

"Adding manpower to a late software project makes it later" was later come to be known as *Brook's Law*.

Effort increases with a greater number of people on a software project for a number of reasons, namely division of workload, effort in onboarding new members, and the need for effective communication.

A surgical team is small and sharp, with the best minds designing the system. The __architect__ ensure conceptual integrity of system. Maintains high function to conceptual complexity ratio. Listens to implementer for architectural improvements. The __implementer__ builds the system based on architectural design from architects. The discipline of following the system design should enhance, not hinder creativity. The __editor__ ensures maximum clarity of documentation generated by the architect. This rework minimises miscommunication of ideas to implementers and testers. The __testers__ form a dedicated team to test the software during the implementation process. This guarantees the integrity of the sytem. The
__language lawyers__ are well-acquainted with the intricacies of the language used. Able to see obscure but efficient ways of solving tricky problems. The __program clerks__ are left in charge of clerical chores, such as paper work, logging results of the test suite etc.

Document your work: essential documents such as objectives, manual, schedule, organization chart, budget keep you on track.

Design your system keeping in mind its flaws. Do not overdesign the second system. Recognize the flaws early (maybe even before the implementation phase) and correct them. Having a strong test suite to start with really helps.

Program maintenance is costly. Prepare your system for change. User needs and perceptions change all the time.

All repairs tend to destroy structure, increase the entropy and disorder of the system.

System debugging is a skill. Debug one system component at a time. Use components only when they are fully battle-tested.

These are just some of my takeaways. I recommend the book to anyone who takes programming seriously.
